So the final
discussion here will
be to evaluate the pros
and cons of external
versus internal
iterators in Java
now that we've kind of seen
how internal iterators work.
We've seen how external
iterators work.
Let's talk about the
good and bad of them.
We'll start first by
talking about the advantages
of internal iterators
over external iterators.
One of the things I
think is pretty clear,
unless you have
super simple code,
is improved code readability.
Now, obviously, this
is all a function
of how well you
understand Java Streams,
but let's assume you
understand Java Streams.
So with Java Streams,
they allow you
to focus on the what
rather than the how.
In particular, there are
no control flow operations.
There's no loops.
There's no if statements.
Everything is handled using
intermediate operations
like filter and map and so on.
In contrast, if you use
external processing,
if you use external
iteration, then you
have to focus on the how.
You have to focus
on the control flow.
So here you can see
we've got a for loop.
We've got an if statement.
So it just means more mechanism.
You have to kind of play
runtime system in your head
and think, OK, this
thing's going to loop.
And if it goes through the
loop, and it checks with an if
statement, blah, blah, blah.
Gets a little complicated.
I think it's arguably more
concise just to read the code
from top to bottom here.
Another thing you can do
with the internal iteration
that you really can't do at
all with external iteration
is apply transparent
optimizations.
So for example,
you can trivially
apply the parallel flag
here, the parallel method,
to convert the sequential
stream into a parallel stream,
and then all this filtering
and mapping and so on
will take place in parallel.
So that if you have
large numbers of URLs,
you're updating large lists
and so on, and your URL array,
if it's got thousands
of elements,
that'll probably
be a nice speed-up.
In contrast, the external
iteration approach
always runs sequentially.
And it uses something
that Brian Goetz, who's
a famous Java architect,
likes to call the accumulator
anti-pattern.
And basically, it is
stuck being sequential.
And to make this
not sequential would
require a lot of extra work
spotting threads, and dealing
with queues, and all the kinds
of nasty, low level things
that Java Streams and parallel
streams just hide from you.
So transparent optimization
is another benefit
of using internal iteration
via the streams mechanism.
And then arguably, you
may have fewer bugs
with the internal
iteration approach.
In particular, notice how the
internal iteration approach
doesn't split creation
from initialization
of the collection
that's used here.
The list of URLs is
initialized by collect.
We don't have to remember
to initialize it first.
In contrast, this external
iteration approach
requires you to remember to
initialize the URLs list.
And if you forgot to do
that, which by the way,
is all too easy to do, then when
you go to add the next element,
chaos and insanity
will break out
because you'll end
up trying to call
add on a null reference,
which will be very bad.
However, everything is
not rainbows and unicorns.
There are some advantages
of external iterators
over internal iterators.
And so I think it's worth taking
a few minutes to just kind
of summarize this very briefly.
By the way, there's
a nice article
that you can see at the
bottom of this link that
talks through a lot
of the pros and cons
of internal and
external iterators
and may provide you with some
additional insights about how
they work and when to use
one style versus another.
So one of the nice things
about internal iterators--
sorry, rewind that.
One of the nice things
of external iterators
relative to internal
iterators is
you can have much more control
over the iteration steps.
So with internal iteration,
the only way you're getting out
of this stream is by
throwing an exception.
Otherwise, it's
just going to keep
running until it stops on its
own accord, which is sometimes
too coarse grain.
In contrast, because
external iteration
allows you to use all the
familiar control constructs
like if statements and
for loops and so on,
you can decide to exit a
loop at an arbitrary point,
or exit a method at
an arbitrary point,
or handle errors more precisely.
Or whatever you need
to do, you can do it
because you are totally in
control of the iteration
process.
You're not relying on some
internal iterator doing things
for you behind the scenes.
Yet another nice feature
of external iteration
is it's actually
possible to have
multiple iterators active over
the same object simultaneously.
So here's an example where we
go ahead and make ourselves
a couple of iterators
that are both iterating
over the same URLs collection.
And then we can do
different logic.
If there's something in iterator
one, we can do one thing.
two, we can do something else.
We are in control.
We can have many things
going on at the same time.
Now, this particular
example may not
be the best example
to showcase why
you would want to have multiple
iterations iterating over
the same collection
simultaneously.
But external iterators gives
you the option to do that.
In contrast, there's only one
internal iterator for a stream.
Now, most of the time,
you could care less.
Because if you need to
do another iteration
over the stream, you
create the new stream
and start over from scratch.
But I think to be fair,
it's important to realize
that there are some benefits,
some additional controls,
some additional
flexibility you get
by using external
iterators directly rather
than internal iterators.
And I should probably
also point out
that for very, very
simple Java programs
like looping through the
list of Three Stooges names,
using a forEach loop is a
pretty darn concise way to go.
So I prefer to use streams
and internal iterators
as my programs get more complex,
especially as I anticipate
the eventual need to have to
go ahead and create streams
that will run in parallel.
That's really where
internal iteration
shines far and above what
you could ever expect
to get with external iteration.